article: add "Once upon a blog..." (#9)
hsablonniere/hsablonniere.com: pages/once-upon-a-blog--9849zg/once-upon-a-blog--9849zg.md

---
title: Once upon a blog...
date: 2020-10-20
tags: article
layout: article.njk
---

<style>
h3 img {
  margin-right: 0.25rem;
  vertical-align: middle;
  width: 1.5rem;
}
</style>

> 🎉 The date is October 16, 2020 and I can officially say: **I have a blog now!**

Reviewer: s/16/20/ ?

Author: Bien vu!!

---
title: Once upon a blog...
date: 2020-10-20
tags: article
layout: article.njk
---

<style>
h3 img {
  margin-right: 0.25rem;
  vertical-align: middle;
  width: 1.5rem;
}
</style>

🎉 The date is October 16, 2020 and I can officially say: **I have a blog now!**

Following a common cliché in our industry, my first official blog post ever is about my own blog.

## 📝 The content

I say blog but this is more of a personal website.
As [Jeremy Keith](https://adactio.com/) would say, it's my _"online home"_.
The main goal is obviously to write articles but I also intend to reference other content like detailed pages for my conference talks, lists of things, online bookmarks and short notes.

> I will mostly write in english but some articles could be translated or written directly in french when it makes more sense.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I will mostly write in English but some articles could be translated or written directly in French when it makes more sense.
```

Most of the content will deal with technical topics around the Web:

* 😍 HTML/CSS/JavaScript
* 🦊 Browsers
* 🕸️ HTTP
* 🔐 Security
* ⚡ Performance

I've been growing my knowledge base and skillset around the Web since IE5 so I think I have a few things to write about in this area.
The content will take the form of short tips, longer tutorials, detailed research, crazy experiments or even not so peaceful rants if I'm really pissed off. 

I also want to write about less technical topics related to my job:

* 🗣️ Public speaking
* 🤯 Sharing knowledge
* 🖊️ Writing documentation
* 💻 Working remotely (in a coworking space)
* ☁️ Cloud services
* 🛡️ Digital sovereignty

A few years ago, I gave a Web/JavaScript class to wonderful students (maybe they're reading this...).
I've also been giving conference talks for the past 6 years.
I really like public speaking and sharing knowledge in general.
I'm still learning a lot but I want to write about this.

I've been working remotely in a coworking space for the past 4 years now.
This had a big impact on my life and the way I work in general.

> Most of the time, remote workers write about working from home but I don't see much articles about coworking spaces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most of the time, remote workers write about working from home but I don't see many articles about coworking spaces.
```

I may write about other topics I'm passionate about:

* 🎬 Cinema
* 🎹 Music
* 🎼 Cinema + Music = Soundtracks
* 🎮 Video games
* 🪓 Woodworking

I'm not sure I have interesting things to say about them yet but suggestions and reviews would be a good start.

## 🎯 Motivations

The goal of this blog is to share my knowledge and experience, but I've learned from others that I should also write for myself.
It's a bit like when you write code comments or documentation.
Most of the time, your future self also ends up needing these detailed explanations.

I also read that writing about a given topic pushes you to learn even more about it.
It's something I experienced and enjoyed a lot when I prepared conference talks and my Web/JavaScript class.

> Also, let's be honest, I've always been impressed by people who answer a question with _"Oh, I wrote an article about that, here's the URL"_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Furthermore, let's be honest, I've always been impressed by people who answer a question with _"Oh, I wrote an article about that, here's the URL"_.
```

> Another motivation is to improve my writing skills, especially in english.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another motivation is to improve my writing skills, especially in English.
```

In my opinion, this is really important for any developer who deals with issues, pull/merge requests and documentation in general.

## 🤩 Inspirations

The style of the site is not done yet.
It's actually a very simple design I started 3 years ago and never finished.
I think I want to try something else, but it wasn't a priority.
I'll share about style inspirations once I start working again on this.

In my early career, I was a regular reader of [A List Apart](https://alistapart.com/) and [Smashing Magazine](https://smashingmagazine.com/).

> Long, researched, carefully reviewed and well written articles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Long, researched, carefully reviewed and well-written articles.
```

> I also read many articles from developers own personal blogs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I also read many articles from developers' own personal blogs.
```

Jake has articles with [animated SVGs](https://jakearchibald.com/2014/offline-cookbook/), how awesome is that?
More seriously, I really like his tone.
He has a tendency to dig deep into a subject which always makes a [fascinating reading](https://jakearchibald.com/2018/i-discovered-a-browser-bug/) in the end.

### ![](./favicon-jeremy-keith.png) [Jeremy Keith](https://adactio.com/)

Jeremy is a strong advocate of progressive enhancement and the [IndieWeb](https://indieweb.org/).
His [articles](https://adactio.com/journal/7706) often have a touch of wisdom I appreciate a lot.
His site is one of the best examples of the IndieWeb I know and it gives me a lot of inspiration on how to publish and share my content.

### ![](./favicon-lea-verou.svg) [Lea Verou](https://lea.verou.me/)

Just like CSS, Lea is awesome!
She has a strong voice and I admire her for that.
Over the years, she shared many great projects and [interesting articles](https://lea.verou.me/2020/04/lch-colors-in-css-what-why-and-how/).
Reading her work is always a good investment of my time.

### ![](./favicon-remy-sharp.ico) [Remy Sharp](https://remysharp.com/)

> Remy shares my enthousiasm for [crazy experiments with Web Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lQMcZtiaD0A).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remy shares my enthusiasm for [crazy experiments with Web Audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lQMcZtiaD0A).
```

I read many of [his articles](https://remysharp.com/2020/07/15/a-px-is-not-a-px) and like Jeremy, he shares links and notes on his site.
He's also the one with the [Christmas movie suggestions](https://remysharp.com/2010/11/29/our-christmas-films-list) every year.

### ![](./favicon-nicolas-martignole.ico) [Nicolas Martignole](https://www.touilleur-express.fr/)

When I started my career, I was doing a lot of Java and Nicolas Martignole's blog, _"Le Touilleur Express"_, was the first one I followed thoroughly.
With the passing years, he started writing about less technical topics like [managing developers](http://www.touilleur-express.fr/2018/10/16/gerer-developpeurs/) or [being a senior developer](http://www.touilleur-express.fr/2009/07/27/senior/).
Always interesting.

### ![](./favicon-nicolas-hoizey.jpg) [Nicolas Hoizey](https://nicolas-hoizey.com/)

> When it comes to the IndieWeb, I could describe Nicolas Hoizey as "the french Jeremy Keith".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When it comes to the IndieWeb, I could describe Nicolas Hoizey as "the French Jeremy Keith".
```

Like Jeremy, he follows the [POSSE](https://indieweb.org/POSSE) principle and the structure of his site is a great source of inspiration for me.
I learned a lot by looking at his [GitHub repo](https://github.com/nhoizey/nicolas-hoizey.com) to see how he built and configured everything.
He wrote a great deal of really good articles, you probably already read the one about [viewport height](https://nicolas-hoizey.com/articles/2015/02/18/viewport-height-is-taller-than-the-visible-part-of-the-document-in-some-mobile-browsers/).

### ![](./favicon-boris-shapira.png) [Boris Shapira](https://boris.schapira.dev/)

Boris writes about the Web but he also writes about politics, citizenship and being a dad.
I'm not sure I'm ready to step out of my confort zone on this but he is an inspiration.

> He often writes [about webperf](https://boris.schapira.dev/notes/2020-09-cumulative-layout-shift-stabilite-page/) and when he does, it's 0% devrel BS and 100% from the field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
He often writes [about webperf](https://boris.schapira.dev/notes/2020-09-cumulative-layout-shift-visual-instability/) and when he does, it's 0% devrel BS and 100% from the field.
```

It makes more sense to link to the English version :)

Like Nicolas Hoizey, I often look at his [GitHub repo](https://github.com/borisschapira/boris.schapira.dev) to see how he built and configured his site. 

## 🛠️ The stack

As of this writing, this site is mostly a static site built with [Eleventy](https://www.11ty.dev/) and hosted on [Clever Cloud](https://www.clever-cloud.com/en/).

Last time I tried to start a blog, I spent all my time writing my own static site generator.
In the end, all I got was a welcome page and no real articles.
This time, I promised myself not to procrastinate (too much) and prioritize features.

### ![](./favicon-eleventy.png) Built with Eleventy

I chose Eleventy because I've heard a lot about its performance and simplicity.

> Let's be honest, I also chose it because it's written in JavaScript and because [all](https://dassur.ma/) [the](https://www.filamentgroup.com/) [cool](https://ffconf.org/) [kids](https://open-wc.org/) [use](https://eslint.org/) [it](https://www.a11yproject.com/) [these](https://piccalil.li/) [days](https://conferences.css-tricks.com/) (hype driven stack choices FTW).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's be honest, I also chose it because it's written in JavaScript and because [all](https://dassur.ma/) [the](https://www.filamentgroup.com/) [cool](https://ffconf.org/) [kids](https://open-wc.org/) [use](https://eslint.org/) [it](https://www.a11yproject.com/) [these](https://piccalil.li/) [days](https://conferences.css-tricks.com/) (hype-driven stack choices FTW).
```

After a few weeks, I have a better understanding of how it works and I think it matches my mindset really well.
It's not trying to do too much, it has one job and it does it very well.

I started with the most basic config and decided to add features along the way.

> If you take a look at my [config file](https://github.com/hsablonniere/hsablonniere.com/blob/master/config/.eleventy.js), you'll notice I only enabled two plugins so far:

Reviewer 2: Maybe link to a specific version? For posterity's sake?

* [RSS](https://www.11ty.dev/docs/plugins/rss/) because RSS is awesome!
* [Syntax highlighting](https://www.11ty.dev/docs/plugins/syntaxhighlight/) for an upcoming article with HTML/CSS code samples.

> Those where the only plugins I really needed before publishing the first articles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Those were the only plugins I really needed before publishing the first articles.
```

There are many other [Eleventy plugins](https://www.npmjs.com/search?q=eleventy-plugin) out there I wanted to try.
I even started experimenting with an [asciidoctor](https://asciidoctor.org/) integration.
However, if I want to beat procrastination, I really need to focus on the content and postpone this expedition in plugin land to another day. 

### ![](./favicon-parcel.ico) Optimized with Parcel (v2)

As explained in [this issue](https://github.com/11ty/eleventy/issues/272), Eleventy does not have an official asset pipeline.
I don't think it's a problem, especially in my context where I don't use any CSS tool (Sass, Less, Tailwind and others).

I strongly believe in decoupling things.
Each layer should do one thing and do it well.
Each layer should know as little as possible about other layers.

> In the context of my own site, I wanted to decouple these two layers: build content and optimize for performance.

Reviewer 2: "build content and optimize for performance" those are not nouns which makes this weird.

Maybe, 
```suggestion
In the context of my own site, I wanted to decouple these two layers: building content and optimizing for performance.
```
?

> When the Eleventy is done building my content, I have a valid static site I could host as is.

Reviewer 2: Is this a case of 'drop the "the"'?

```suggestion
When Eleventy is done building my content, I have a valid static site I could host as is.
```

Or maybe you should add another word after this?

```suggestion
When the Eleventy process is done building my content, I have a valid static site I could host as is.
```

It's just not optimized for performance yet.

> I almost decided to go live without any optimizations, but it was too much fun to finally try [Parcel (v2)](https://v2.parceljs.org/).

Reviewer 2: This sentence feels weird to me.

Although it's not saying the same thing, this would be better (to me):

```suggestion
I almost decided to go live without any optimizations, but it was too tempting to finally try [Parcel (v2)](https://v2.parceljs.org/).
```

An alternative:

```suggestion
I almost decided to go live without any optimizations, but I ended up trying [Parcel (v2)](https://v2.parceljs.org/) and had a lot of fun.
```

I was able to use the output directory from Eleventy as an input and generate an optimized site with:

* Minified HTML
* Minified CSS
* Optimized images
* Renamed assets with hashes so they can have "never expire" cache settings

> You used a JavaScript bundler for a site that doesn't have any JS?

Yes I did my friend.
Parcel is more than just a JavaScript bundler.
Unlike [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) or [Rollup](https://rollupjs.org/guide/en/), it is really Web centric and it can start from an HTML entrypoint.
I also chose it over lower level solution like [Gulp](https://gulpjs.com/) because it knows how HTML, CSS, JS and image files depend on each other.

Parcel v2 is still in beta.
I had to create a few custom plugins and I'm looking forward to the release of official plugins to add [other improvements on images](https://github.com/parcel-bundler/parcel/issues/3738).
You can find more details about how I used it in this [pull request](https://github.com/hsablonniere/hsablonniere.com/pull/8).

### ![](./favicon-clever-cloud.png) Hosted on Clever Cloud

> When I bought this domain in 2015, I hosted this site on [OVH](https://www.ovh.com/) with docker on a virtual private server I had.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When I bought this domain in 2015, I hosted this site on [OVH](https://www.ovh.com/) with Docker on a virtual private server I had.
```

Configuring this by myself was fun at the beginning but it clearly was a pain to maintain and secure.

A few years later, I moved it to [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/).
When it comes to deploying a static site, they really have a nice product, even when you only have a homepage and no articles.

> When I started working again on this in september, I decided to move the site to [Clever Cloud](https://www.clever-cloud.com/en/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When I started working again on this in September, I decided to move the site to [Clever Cloud](https://www.clever-cloud.com/en/).
```

> First and obvious reason: I work for them.

Reviewer 2: Saying "for them" and then using the first-person feels a bit weird.

Although you are working remotely, I would say this:
```suggestion
First and obvious reason: I work there.
```

We have a push-to-deploy mindset with lots of features around it: live logs, detailed metrics, monitoring, auto-scaling, rollbacks, auto HTTPS...

> When it comes to deploying a static site on our platform, we have several options:

Reviewer 2: > When it comes to deploying a static site

This is redundant with the previous sentence about Netlify.

```suggestion
Regarding the deployment of static sites on our platform, we have several options:
```

* You can use the static type (Apache) - [blog post](https://www.clever-cloud.com/blog/engineering/2020/06/18/deploy-static-site-hugo/)
* You can use Cellar, our S3 compatible object storage - [blog post](https://www.clever-cloud.com/blog/engineering/2020/06/24/deploy-cellar-s3-static-site/)

I went for a third option, deploying a JavaScript application with our [Node.js support](https://www.clever-cloud.com/en/nodejs-hosting).
This is clearly not the most reasonable choice for a static site.

> However, it is yet another opportunity to dogfood what I work on every day (even if our platform is already hosted on our platform).

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure that this term is *that* common. I would at least put it in italic.

```suggestion
However, it is yet another opportunity to *dogfood* what I work on every day (even if our platform is already hosted on our platform).
```

Or maybe a link?

```suggestion
However, it is yet another opportunity to [dogfood](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eating_your_own_dog_food) what I work on every day (even if our platform is already hosted on our platform).
```

The other reason is that on top of just serving static files, I wanted to experiment with some dynamic backend features.
With a Node.js app, I can easily serve static files and use my preferred language to code the dynamic parts.

### 🙈 Served with my own HTTP framework

With those constraints, any reasonable developer would have used [Express](https://expressjs.com/), [Hapi](https://hapi.dev/) or [Fastify](https://www.fastify.io/) but that would be too easy, right?

In the context of another project, I started my [own Node.js HTTP framework](https://github.com/hsablonniere/hititipi/) as a learning experiment.
I tried to reuse it to serve the site, but I ended up rewriting it from scratch with a different approach.
This time I wrote some unit tests.
Procrastination clearly punched me in the face with this one, but I have to admit, digging into those HTTP RFCs was so much fun.

The page you're reading now was served with this custom HTTP framework.

> You can have a look at the [configuration](https://github.com/hsablonniere/hsablonniere.com/blob/master/start-server.mjs) if you're curious but please, just please, **DOT NOT use it**, especially **NOT in production**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can have a look at the [configuration](https://github.com/hsablonniere/hsablonniere.com/blob/master/start-server.mjs) if you're curious but please, just please, **DO NOT use it**, especially **NOT in production**.
```

I would like to say I know what I'm doing but I'm not.
What I can say is: it kinda works and I'm learning a lot doing it.

## 👋 To be continued...

Thanks for reading this intro.
While you wait for the next articles, you can already subscribe to my RSS feed:

[`https://www.hsablonniere.com/articles-feed.xml`](https://www.hsablonniere.com/articles-feed.xml)

> If you have any suggestion regarding the future articles, please contact me or open an issue on the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/hsablonniere/hsablonniere.com/). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have any suggestions regarding the future articles, please contact me or open an issue on the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/hsablonniere/hsablonniere.com/). 
```
